Initial GAMMA docs take (#2238)
kubernetes-sigs/gateway-api: site-src/index.md

[`HTTPRoute`][HTTPRoute], [`TCPRoute`][TCPRoute], etc., as well as the
Kubernetes [`Service`][Service] resource - aim to evolve Kubernetes service
networking through expressive, extensible, and role-oriented interfaces that
are implemented by many vendors and have broad industry support.

[GatewayClass]: /api-types/gatewayclass
[Gateway]: /api-types/gateway
[HTTPRoute]: /api-types/httproute
[TCPRoute]: /api-types/tcproute
[Service]: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service/

![Gateway API Model](./images/api-model.png)

The Gateway API was originally designed to manage traffic from clients outside
the cluster to services inside the cluster -- the _ingress_ or
[_north/south_][north/south traffic] case. Over time, interest from service
mesh users prompted the creation of the [GAMMA initiative][gamma] to define
how the Gateway API could also be used for inter-service or [_east/west_
traffic][east/west traffic] within the same cluster.

## Gateway API for Ingress <a name="for-ingress"></a>

When using the Gateway API to manage ingress traffic, the [Gateway] resource
defines a point of access at which traffic from outside clients can be routed

> into the cluster ([north/south traffic]). (If you're familiar with the older

Reviewer: Tiny nit: Always need to be very careful to avoid limiting the scope of the API here. I think Gateway API can and should be used to route traffic within a cluster (not necessarily just from outside to inside) and also that it should be used to route traffic to endpoints outside a cluster (ie multi-cluster Services or hybrid deployments that are only half on k8s). I don't actually know how to rephrase this in a way that makes sense but also doesn't exclude those use cases though, so for now just leaving a comment so we don't lose track of it.

Author: Does 5783333f78307a4a037b61c111788454659a692b look good for this?

> Ingress resource, you can think of a Gateway as analogous to a
> more-expressive, updated Ingress.)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Ingress API](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/ingress/), you can think of Gateway API as analogous to a more-expressive next-generation version of that API.
```

Author: Thanks!

instances (represented by Gateway resources), in the same cluster.

[north/south traffic]:/concepts/glossary#north-south-traffic
[gateway controller]:/concepts/glossary#gateway-controller
[gateway-attachment]:/concepts/api-overview#attaching-routes-to-gateways

## Gateway API for Service Mesh (the [GAMMA initiative][gamma]) <a name="for-service-mesh"></a>

Things are a bit different when using the Gateway API to manage a [service
mesh][service-mesh]. Since there will usually only be one mesh active in the
cluster, the [Gateway] and [GatewayClass] resources are not used; instead,
individual route resources (such as [HTTPRoute]) are [associated directly with
Service resources][mesh-attachment], permitting the mesh to manage traffic
from any traffic directed to that Service while preserving the role-oriented
nature of the Gateway API.

This use case is still rather new, and should be expected to evolve fairly
quickly. One particular area that has rapidly become critical for GAMMA is the
definition of the different [facets of the Service resource][service-facets].

[gamma]:/contributing/gamma/
[service-mesh]:/concepts/glossary#service-mesh

> [service-facets]:/concepts/service-facets.md

Author: Thanks for the catches on these links! I've fixed a bunch of things in 21eeb1d52945aa3fd7e4e4ce100c579303beb9e5.

various layers of the API. This makes granular customization possible at the
appropriate places within the API structure.

Some other notable capabilities include:

- **GatewayClasses** - GatewayClasses formalize types of load balancing
implementations. These classes make it easy and explicit for users to
understand what kind of capabilities are available via the Kubernetes resource
model.
- **Shared Gateways and cross-Namespace support** - They allow the sharing of
load balancers and VIPs by permitting independent Route resources to attach to
the same Gateway. This allows teams (even across Namespaces) to share
infrastructure safely without direct coordination.
- **Typed Routes and typed backends** - The Gateway API supports typed Route
resources and also different types of backends. This allows the API to be
flexible in supporting various protocols (like HTTP and gRPC) and
various backend targets (like Kubernetes Services, storage buckets, or
functions).
- **Service mesh support** with the GAMMA initiative - The Gateway API
supports associating routing resources with Service resources, to configure
service meshes as well as ingress controllers.

> ## Why does a role-oriented API matter? <a name="role-oriented"></a>

Author: This particular one wasn't referenced anywhere, so I've just removed the anchor (I added it before deciding to split out the "Roles and Personas" page).
